Hello, everyone.
Up until this point in the course, we've been writing code in the language.
However, at this point we're ready to start writing code in an additional language called JavaScript.
Now, while it's certainly possible to simply create a JavaScript file in your text editor, in the
modern era of Web development, it's essentially a requirement to have some sort of build tool that
will combine and compile our various JavaScript files and dependencies into a single file.
That's easy to deliver to the viewers of our site.
And you don't need to just take my word on that to prove it for yourself.
You can simply open up the official twenty twenty one themed folder.
Right, created by WordPress.
In that folder you'll see a file called Packaged JSON Now.
Don't worry, I don't expect you to know what this package JSON file means, but I'm just letting you
know that this is proof that even the official WordPress themes themselves use some sort of build tool
to sort of compile and combine their files.
In other words, it isn't just my own personal preference to make things overly complicated by introducing
a build tool.
This is definitely the industry standard.
Now, in the past, I personally maintained my own JavaScript automation workflow tool to perform those
combining and compiling steps.
But in recent years, the WordPress team has created an official JavaScript tool package called at Symbol
WordPress Scripts.
I love this package.
It requires almost zero configuration on our part and it's super easy to set up.
So this is what we're going to use in this course for all of our JavaScript needs.
So at this point, the question becomes how in the world do we use this official WordPress JavaScript
tool?
Well, luckily, it's very easy, but we do need to make sure first that our personal computer has something
called Node JS installed on it.
If you don't remember ever manually installing no JS on your computer, there's a very good chance that
you don't currently have it installed.
So right now you can do this porres, this video lesson and in a new browser tab, visit the official
site.
It's Node Jast dot org from the homepage.
Just click on one of these to download links.
You can use either the ELTs or long term support version or the current newest version.
It doesn't matter which one you choose, they will both work perfectly.
OK, once you click on one of these and the download finishes, you should be able to just open up that
downloaded file and all of the default options are OK.
So you should be able to just click next, next, next.
Once the installation finishes, we want to test and make sure that node is actually successfully installed
on your computer.
To do that, we're going to jump in to voice code.
Now, if you've been using a different program as your text editor, that's OK.
But I strongly encourage you to try out V code just for this JavaScript section.
I say this because LVS code gives us very easy access to a command line that's already pointing towards
the folder we're working with.
Now, if you're more of a power user and you already understand what a command line is and how to work
with it, then that's fine.
You can use whatever text editor you prefer.
But if you're more of a beginner, I strongly, strongly recommend Visual Studio code.
And here's why.
So right now we need to open up a command line or a terminal.
And within voice code, it's as easy as pressing control J on Windows or command J on Mac.
So you can see that opened up a command line down towards the bottom.
You can also open up this command line by clicking the view menu up in the very top of V code.
And then you should see an option called terminal.
But the keyboard shortcut again is control on Windows Command.
John Mac now in the command line.
You can type this out to make sure that node is now installed on your computer.
It's just node and then a space dash dash version hit enter.
And as long as you see some sort of version number here, you're good to go.
You're in business.
If instead you see command not found or unknown command, you might just need to restart your computer
or at least restart your text editor program.
OK, but from this point forward in the video, I'm going to assume that everyone now has node installed
on their computer.
So where do we go from here?
Or in other words, how do we start using the official WordPress JavaScript tool?
Well, in an effort to make this as simple as possible, we really just need to move over one new file.
Into our theme folder now, remember when we first set up the HTML and CCWs design for our theme, you
might remember we borrowed files from my repo called University Statik.
Remember, we didn't write any of the CFS ourselves.
We just used the CFS from this repo.
If you no longer have these files on your computer, that's OK.
You can just visit this Uttara once again and then use this green code button here and choose download
zip.
The reason I want you to download this folder again, here it is on my desktop.
So it should be a folder called University Static Master.
If you download that zip inside that folder, there is a file named packaged JSON packaged JSON is essentially
the ingredients list or the recipe for your note or JavaScript project.
So right now I want you to move this package, JSON file to live inside your theme folder.
So in your text editor, if you're using voice code and you already have the sidebar opened to your
theme folder, you can just.
Right.
Click on a file and choose reveal in finder or show in Explorer.
So that pulls up this window.
This is my theme folder.
So now I'm just going to move that package JSON file into my theme folder.
OK, now in our text editor, you can go ahead and actually open up package DOT JSON and we can talk
a little bit about what's included in this file.
Let's actually begin down at the very bottom of this file with this dependencies area.
So there it is, the official WordPress JavaScript package that we looked at earlier, I've already
listed that are included that here as a dependency for us.
Glide is the JavaScript that powers the slideshow animation on our homepage.
Normalize is sort of just an overall success reset that sets all browsers to have a baseline padding
and margin for basic elements.
And then Axios is something we'll use later in the course for network requests.
So big picture this package JSON file is really just a recipe or ingredients list, and these are the
four ingredients that we're going to need.
So now to actually download or install these four things, all we need to do down in the command line.
And again, this is why I'm such a fan of VST code.
So we need our command line to be pointing towards our theme folder.
But instead of having to type code for change directory and then manually navigating into this folder
with VTS code, as long as your sidebar project is pointing towards your desired folder, well, that's
the same directory or folder your command line will automatically point towards.
So run this command with me.
It's just npm install.
When we installed the node on our computer, it also gave us a tool called NPM, which stands for Node
Package Manager, and then this installed command will just look at our packaged JSON file and automatically
go download and install all of our dependencies.
So let's just press enter on this NPM install command and now even on a very fast computer and Internet
connection, this will take a minute or two.
But when it finally does complete, we're now ready to actually use the official WordPress JavaScript
package.
If we scroll up just a little bit in the package JSON file, this is where the scripts area comes into
play.
In particular, these two tasks or scripts named Build and Start.
Let's first learn how to use the START task and then after that we can cover build.
So do this with me down in the command line type npm run start.
Go ahead and press enter and now this start script will just continue to run in the background, so
it's going to continue running until we explicitly tell it to stop.
And what it's doing in the background is it's watching us.
It's watching for when we save changes to our files.
So to explain how this works does with me in your sidebar look for the S.R. See folder, go into it
and look for the file named Index Jass within that file, maybe down at the very bottom here.
Let's just add an annoying alert JavaScript pop up just as a test so we can say alert parentheses to
call that, give it a string of text and say just a test.
Now, as soon as I save that, you'll see that new text appeared down in the command line because the
official WordPress JavaScript package is re bundling up our compiled JavaScript.
And now if I go back to my website and refresh perfect, we see that alert message, just a test.
So let's talk about what's going on here.
And first of all, I do want to point out that this folder absolutely needs to be named SIRC.
So the WordPress JavaScript tool is looking specifically for a folder with that exact name, and then
it's specifically looking for a file with the exact name of Index Jass.
So essentially the SC folder, this is our source code.
This is optimized to be readable by you and I.
Then the WordPress JavaScript tool bundles it all up, compiles it up into a single file and that all
lives in the build folder.
So if you look in the build folder, here's a file named index.
And if you click on that notice, this file is not very easy to read for humans.
So you and I never directly edit this file.
All of the JavaScript that we will actually work with in type and code ourselves lives in the Essere
source folder.
And then any time we save a change to these files, well, that start task is in the background running
and watching for our saved changes and it's going to rebundle it all up into the build folder.
Now, what's cool is the official WordPress JavaScript package also handles CSC and even SAS or success.
So you'll notice at the top of our index JS file I'm importing a success file and then the WordPress
workflow tool is smart enough to split that out into its own separate CFS file.
So, again, just to be clear, you and I never, ever directly edit a file in the build folder.
These are simply Viksund JavaScript files that we load within our functions file.
Right.
These are optimized for Web browsers, not for you and dayas developers.
Anyways, though, if we wanted to make an example, Xchange, you could dig into the CSC folder in
the root of our theme, go into modules and just for a quick test, if you jump into headline success
and for this large Ruel, maybe right inside the rule, I'll say colour should be yellow.
And if I save that and then refresh the front end.
Well, in just a moment we can get rid of that JavaScript alert.
But notice this text is yellow.
Let me get rid of that.
I don't actually want that in place.
And then also, once you've tested and confirmed that you've seen this alert pop up, we don't actually
want that so you can get rid of it.
OK, the point is, though, is the start task is going to continue watching until you tell it to stop.
So how do we tell it to stop?
Well, you just click onto the command line so it has your focus and then press control and see on your
keyboard.
Practice makes perfect.
So if you wanted to start it up again, it's just npm run, start.
Let's talk about this other task that we saw in packaged JSON called Build.
It's essentially the exact same thing as start only it doesn't run in the background.
It just runs once so you can run, npm, run, build and that's going to take all of your source code
from the Sarsae folder.
It's going to bundle up your JavaScript and CSFs out into the build folder.
But that's it.
It's just going to do it that one time.
So it's useful to have in certain situations, but 99 percent of the time you're going to want to use
the START task and just let it run in the background.
That way you don't have to think about it and it's watching.
And any time you save a change to your files, everything just gets automatically bundled up for you.
So throughout the rest of this entire course, whenever we work on any sort of JavaScript code together,
remember that in your command line you'll want to run the NPM run start command.
Now, before we bring this lesson to a close, you might be wondering where my.
Sarsae folder came from, for example, maybe you don't have the Sarsae folder in your theme folder,
so if you're wondering how to get this folder in the files that it contains, just think back to when
we first set up the HTML and success for this theme.
Remember, we borrowed code from this repository.
So in the exact same repo that we downloaded a zip of earlier in this video, remember, the university
static master folder will remember that that folder contains build success images and SIRC folders.
So this one repo has all of the files that you'll need.
Also, if you're confused and you're looking for a working example of what we just set up in this lesson,
remember that there's a downloadable zip at the end of each lesson and this lesson in particular, you
can download that, extract it, and then you'll have the exact same files and setup that I have here.
On that note, however, the zip files at the end of a lesson, they do not contain this node underscore
modules folder because this folder can become very large and file size.
So what in the world is this folder?
Well, remember in the command line when we ran the NPM install command and that downloaded all of the
dependencies.
Well, this node modules folder, this is where it saves all of those downloaded files.
So there's no need to back those up in a zip file.
Or if you're familiar with GIT, there's no need to keep this folder inversion control because you can
always recreate this folder perfectly by simply using the NPM install command.
OK, but big picture.
Before you move on to the next lesson, I want everyone to be able to run NPM run, start from their
command line, OK?
And when you run that and when you make your sample change into this file and add the alert test message
that you should then see on your front end, well, not only should you see this alert pop up message,
but your slide show down on the homepage that should still be working as well.
Cool.
Having said all of that, we're now ready to move on and write JavaScript when and where we need to.
Let's keep things rolling and I'll see you in the next lesson.